[DOC] Add backend documentation about configuring ISM notifications (#4210)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _im-plugin/notifications-settings.md

---
layout: default
title: Configuring notifications settings
parent: Managing indexes
nav_order: 100
---

## Configuring notifications settings

Introduced 2.8
{: .label .label-purple }

Notifications settings allow users to control how they receive notifications about index events. You can use either OpenSearch Dashboards or the REST API to configure notifications. Supported communication channels include Amazon Chime, Amazon Simple Notification Service (Amazon SNS), Amazon Simple Email Service (Amazon SES), email through SMTP, Slack, and custom webhooks. Supported index operations include resize, reindex, open, and force merge. See [Notifications](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/observing-your-data/notifications/index/) for further details. 

> To configure configure the notifications settings for long-running index operations using OpenSearch Dashboards, go to **Dev Tools** under the main menu. When creating notifications using the API, the LRON setting can be configured two ways: as a concrete task or as a global and persistent task. The LRON setting with `task_id` is ad hoc and automatically deletes when the task ends. The LRON setting using `action_name` is global and persists and applies to all operations of this action type.

Reviewer: I think the reference to Dev Tools in Dashboards is confusing. The way to do it using the UI is to go to index management > Notifications. If the user is doing it through the API, they can use curl or dev tools. Normally, we don't direct them to dev tools from an individual API page. How about
```suggestion
Configuring notifications settings is useful for long-running index operations. When creating long-running operation notifications using the API, you can configure the `lron_config` setting in two ways:
- As a one-time task: If you pass a `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task is one-time and the setting automatically deletes when the task ends.
- As a global and persistent task: If you pass an `action_name` in the `lron_config` object, the task is global, persistent, and applies to all operations of this action type.
```

Reviewer: @zhichao-aws Some questions:
- Where do you get the `task_id` from?
- In the example below, both `task_id` and `action_name` are passed. What happens in this case? 
- For the request and response, we have to provide descriptions for all fields and the possible values for enum fields. Could you help with that? Also, what are the possible values for action_name? For `lron_condition`, are the possible values only `success` and `failure`? Which fields are required and which are optional?

Reviewer 2: - The task id can be obtained by setting the request parameter `wait_for_completion` as `false` for open/reindex/resize/force merge. https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/6228. The index operation will return the task id immediately and execute at the background.
- Infact if task_id has higher priority. If task_id is passed, action_name will be ignored in our code. But it may be useful if user want to search settings about certain actions.
- For lron_condition, it only has `success` and `failure`. Both of them are optional, the value is `true` by default. `lron_condition` itself is optional (true, true by default). For action_name, current possible values are "indices:data/write/reindex", "indices:admin/resize", "indices:admin/forcemerge", "indices:admin/open".

Reviewer 2: The config must contain taskID or actionName. And enabled lron_config(i.e. at least there is one `true` in `lron_condition`) must contain at least one channel

Reviewer: Thanks a lot, @zhichao-aws! Could you also provide an actual example of a request and response for each section where we have them? Thanks!

Reviewer 2: Do you mean create/update/read/delete section, or the cases we talked above?

Reviewer: create/update/read/delete. Basically, wherever we have requests/response placeholders now we should have actual requests/responses.

Reviewer 2: create/update are actual requests/responses. Here are actual responses of get/delete:
request:
`GET _plugins/_im/lron`
response:
```
{
  "lron_configs": [
    {
      "_id": "LRON:indices:admin/open",
      "lron_config": {
        "lron_condition": {
          "success": false,
          "failure": false
        },
        "action_name": "indices:admin/open",
        "channels": []
      }
    },
    {
      "_id": "LRON:indices:data/write/reindex",
      "lron_config": {
        "lron_condition": {
          "success": false,
          "failure": true
        },
        "action_name": "indices:data/write/reindex",
        "channels": [
          {
            "id": "my_chime"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ],
  "total_number": 2
}
```
request:
`GET _plugins/_im/lron/LRON:indices:data%2Fwrite%2Freindex`
response:
```
{
  "lron_configs": [
    {
      "_id": "LRON:indices:data/write/reindex",
      "lron_config": {
        "lron_condition": {
          "success": false,
          "failure": true
        },
        "action_name": "indices:data/write/reindex",
        "channels": [
          {
            "id": "my_chime"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ],
  "total_number": 1
}
```
request:
`DELETE _plugins/_im/lron/LRON:indices:data%2Fwrite%2Freindex`
response(same with delete doc in opensearch normal index):
```
{
  "_index": ".opensearch-control-center",
  "_id": "LRON:indices:data/write/reindex",
  "_version": 2,
  "result": "deleted",
  "forced_refresh": true,
  "_shards": {
    "total": 2,
    "successful": 2,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "_seq_no": 2,
  "_primary_term": 1
}
```

> This documentation is intended for IT administrators as a guide to configuring notifications settings.

Reviewer: I would delete this line.

## Create, read, update, and delete (CRUD) operations

> The following code examples show how to configure notifications settings for long-running index operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples show how to configure notifications settings for long-running index operations.
```

### Create 

> The following example request creates the notification using the `channels` field:

Reviewer: Insert a request fields table before the example with descriptions of the fields, required/optional, and default values if any.

```json
POST /_plugins/_im/lron
{
  "lron_config": {
      "task_id":"dQlcQ0hQS2mwF-AQ7icCMw:12354",
      "action_name":"indices:data/write/reindex",
      "lron_condition": {
        "success": false,
        "failure": true
      },
      "channels":[
          {"id":"channel1"},
          {"id":"channel2"}
      ]
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}
````

which results in the following response: 

```json
{
  "_id": "LRON:dQlcQ0hQS2mwF-AQ7icCMw:12354",
  "lron_config": {
    "lron_condition": {
      "success": false,
      "failure": true
    },
    "task_id": "dQlcQ0hQS2mwF-AQ7icCMw:12354",
    "action_name": "indices:data/write/reindex",
    "channels": [
      {
        "id": "channel1"
      },
      {
        "id": "channel2"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Read

The following GET request examples retrieve the current notifications settings for a user or group. This information can be used to determine what types of notifications the user or group is currently recieveing, and to make changes to the notifications settings as needed. 

Get one document

```bash

>  GET /_plugins/_im/lron/{lronID}

Reviewer: @zhichao-aws Is the <lronID> the `_id` from the response when you create an lron setting?

>  GET /_plugins/_im/lron/{lronID}

Reviewer: Global: include copy-curl for all requests and make them json instead of bash.

>  GET /_plugins/_im/lron/{lronID}

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is the `_id` from the response. For global lron_config, it will be "LRON:"+action_name. For one-time lron_config, it will be "LRON:"+task_id.
Here is one thing I want to call out, there maybe char "/" in action_name, and it may be in `_id`. If users are using dev tools, they will need to use [http encode](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_urlencode.ASP) to transfer "/" to "%2F" in action name. e.g. PUT _plugins/_im/lron/LRON:indices:admin%2Fopen in dev tools

---
layout: default
title: Configuring notifications settings
parent: Managing indexes
nav_order: 100
---

## Configuring notifications settings

Introduced 2.8
{: .label .label-purple }

Notifications settings allow users to control how they receive notifications about index events. You can use either OpenSearch Dashboards or the REST API to configure notifications. See [Notifications]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/notifications/index/) and [Configuring notifications through Dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/im-dashboards/notifications/) for further details. 

Configuring notifications settings is useful for long-running index operations. When creating long-running operation notifications using the API, you can configure the `lron_config` setting in two ways:

- As a one-time task: If you pass a `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task is one-time and the setting automatically deletes when the task ends.

> - As a global and persistent task: If you pass an `action_name` in the `lron_config` object, the task is global, persistent, and applies to all operations of this action type.

Reviewer 2: To be precise, If you pass an `action_name` and not pass the "task_id", then it's global and persistent

---
layout: default
title: Notification settings
nav_order: 100
---

# Notification settings

Introduced 2.8
{: .label .label-purple }

Use notification settings to configure notifications about long-running index operations. Set up automatic [notifications]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/notifications/index/) when long-running index operations are complete by [using Notifications in OpenSearch Dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/im-dashboards/notifications/) or through the API.

> Configuring notification settings is useful for long-running index operations, such as `open`, `reindex`, `resize`, and `force merge`. When you send a request for those operations and set the `wait_for_completion` parameter to `false`, the operation will return immediately and the response will contain a task ID. You can use that task ID to configure notifications for this operation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Configuring notification settings is useful for long-running index operations, such as `open`, `reindex`, `resize`, and `force merge`. When you send a request for those operations and set the `wait_for_completion` parameter to `false`, the operation returns immediately and the response contains a task ID. You can use that task ID to configure notifications for this operation.
```

## Configuring notification settings

> When creating long-running operation notifications using the API, you can configure the `lron_config` using the `task_id` and `action_name` parameters as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When creating long-running operation notifications using the API, you can configure the `lron_config` object using the `task_id` and `action_name` parameters as follows:
```

Reviewer: Reworded.

> - **One-time setting**: If you pass a `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task is one-time and the setting is automatically deleted when the task ends. If you pass both `task_id` and `action_name`, `action_name` is ignored but may be useful to you for searching and debugging notification settings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **One-time setting**: If you pass `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task runs one time and the setting is automatically deleted when the task ends. If you pass both `task_id` and `action_name`, `action_name` is ignored but may be useful to you for searching and debugging notification settings.
```

> - **Global, persistent setting**: If you pass an `action_name` and don't pass a `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task is global, persistent, and applies to all operations of this action type.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Global, persistent setting**: If you pass an `action_name` and don't pass a `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task is global and persistent and applies to all operations of this action type.
```

> - **Global, persistent setting**: If you pass an `action_name` and don't pass a `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task is global and persistent and applies to all operations of this action type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Global, persistent setting**: If you pass `action_name` and not `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task is global and persistent and applies to all operations of this action type.
```

        },
        "action_name": "indices:data/write/reindex",
        "channels": [
          {
            "id": "my_chime"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ],
  "total_number": 2
}
```

## Update notification settings 

The following example modifies an existing notification setting with the specified [notification setting ID](#notification-setting-id):

```json
PUT /_plugins/_im/lron/<lronID>
{
  "lron_config": {
      "task_id":"dQlcQ0hQS2mwF-AQ7icCMw:12354",
      "action_name":"indices:data/write/reindex",
      "lron_condition": {
        "success": false,
        "failure": true
      },
      "channels":[
          {"id":"channel1"},
          {"id":"channel2"}
      ]
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The response contains the updated setting:

```json
{
  "_id": "LRON:dQlcQ0hQS2mwF-AQ7icCMw:12354",
  "lron_config": {
    "lron_condition": {
      "success": false,
      "failure": true
    },
    "task_id": "dQlcQ0hQS2mwF-AQ7icCMw:12354",
    "action_name": "indices:data/write/reindex",
    "channels": [
      {
        "id": "channel1"
      },
      {
        "id": "channel2"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Delete notification settings 

> The following example shows how to remove a notifications setting with the specified [notification setting ID](#notification-setting-id):

Author: ```suggestion
The following example removes a notifications setting with the specified [notification setting ID](#notification-setting-id):
```

```json
DELETE /_plugins/_im/lron/<lronID>
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> For example the following request deletes the notification setting for the `reindex` operation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the following request deletes the notification setting for the `reindex` operation:
```

---
layout: default
title: Notification settings
nav_order: 100
---

# Notification settings

Introduced 2.8
{: .label .label-purple }

Use notification settings to configure notifications about long-running index operations. Set up automatic [notifications]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/notifications/index/) when long-running index operations are complete by [using Notifications in OpenSearch Dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/im-dashboards/notifications/) or through the API.

Configuring notification settings is useful for long-running index operations, such as `open`, `reindex`, `resize`, and `force merge`. When you send a request for those operations and set the `wait_for_completion` parameter to `false`, the operation will return immediately and the response will contain a task ID. You can use that task ID to configure notifications for this operation.

## Configuring notification settings

When creating long-running operation notifications using the API, you can configure the `lron_config` using the `task_id` and `action_name` parameters as follows:

> - **One-time task**: If you pass a `task_id` in the `lron_config` object, the task is one-time and the setting is automatically deleted when the task ends. If you pass both `task_id` and `action_name`, `action_name` is ignored but may be useful to you for searching and debugging notification settings.

Reviewer 2: I think the wording "One-time setting" or "Global, persistent setting" may be better. The "task" here may cause confusion with the "task_id" task.

Reviewer: @zhichao-aws Implemented, thanks. The PR is ready for your final review.
